docs/protocol.md, before:

# LIKU Protocol & Approval Framework

This protocol synthesizes the Tier-2/Tier-3 tmux guidance (see `Ideas/extension-brainstorming-tty` and `Ideas/extension-brainstorming-RFC-007-AISTOP`) with modern approval practices from VS Code, Claude Code, Gemini CLI, and OpenAI Codex.

## 1. Core Principles

1. **Zero Interference** – Never execute commands in user terminals; use LIKU-managed tmux sessions.
2. **State Awareness** – Inspect TerminalID, PID, PGID, SID, and job tables before issuing commands.
3. **Process Group Responsibility** – Send signals to PGID/SID to affect entire jobs safely.
4. **CLI-First Auditing** – All actions observable via CLI streaming before HTTP endpoints exist.
5. **User Consent** – Approval modes must be explicit and stored per user.

## 2. Lifecycle States

```
DISCOVER → INSPECT → PREPARE WINDOW → EXECUTE → COMPLETE → ARCHIVE
```

Each transition emits an event (see `docs/event-bus.md`). Failures revert to `DISCOVER` with diagnostic info.

## 3. Approval Modes

| Mode | Description | Source Inspiration |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `auto` | Executes allowed operations silently once configured. | Codex `--full-auto` |
| `ask` | Prompts user for confirmation on each potentially destructive action. | VS Code Workspace Trust |
| `deny` | Blocks the action until operator toggles mode. | Claude Code sandbox defaults |
| `plan-review` | Produces a plan, awaits approval per stage, then executes. | Gemini CLI Agent Mode |

Approval state is stored in SQLite (`context_store.approvals`). CLI commands:

```
bookkeeper set approval ask
bookkeeper show approval
```

Bookkeeper also surfaces the current mode in its status bar.

## 4. Guidance Protocol

1. Subagents emit `guidance.request` when they need feedback.
2. Bookkeeper prompts the user, logs the response to `logs/guidance/<session>.json`, and emits `guidance.append`.
3. If the user references historical guidance, Bookkeeper reads the JSON file and summarizes entries without converting formats.

## 5. Error Remediation Protocol

1. Detect error keywords -> emit `agent.error` event.
2. Append remediation sentence to `/agents/<id>/commands/DATE.jsonl`.
3. Notify Bookkeeper so it can display the remediation summary immediately.

## 6. Conversational File Management

- Listing and deletion requests occur via natural language (see `docs/bookkeeper.md`).
- Bookkeeper never deletes files; it only confirms and shows the manual POSIX command.
- Events `guidance.list` and `guidance.delete.requested` capture audit context.

## 7. Retention Policy

- Guidance JSON files persist until the user removes them.
- `/agents/<id>/commands` persist for the project lifecycle.
- Event logs rotate by day but should be archived before deletion to maintain traceability.

## 8. Compliance Checklist

- [ ] Commands only run in `liku` tmux sessions.
- [ ] Approval mode stored before executing agent tasks.
- [ ] `/agents/<id>/commands` updated for every remediation.
- [ ] Guidance logs listed/deleted via conversational prompts.
- [ ] HTTP endpoints disabled until approvals + guidance defaults configured.

This protocol ensures LIKU remains safe, auditable, and aligned with industry standards as the extension matures.

Commit message:

feat: Add 'liku exec' and 'liku panes' commands for enhanced tmux session management and update documentation extension is able to install and render static info of dynamic data.

docs/protocol.md, after:

# LIKU Protocol & Approval Framework

This protocol synthesizes the Tier-2/Tier-3 tmux guidance (see `Ideas/extension-brainstorming-tty` and `Ideas/extension-brainstorming-RFC-007-AISTOP`) with modern approval practices from VS Code, Claude Code, Gemini CLI, and OpenAI Codex.

## 1. Core Principles

1. **Zero Interference** – Never execute commands in user terminals; use LIKU-managed tmux sessions.
2. **State Awareness** – Inspect TerminalID, PID, PGID, SID, and job tables before issuing commands.
3. **Process Group Responsibility** – Send signals to PGID/SID to affect entire jobs safely.
4. **CLI-First Auditing** – All actions observable via CLI streaming before HTTP endpoints exist.
5. **User Consent** – Approval modes must be explicit and stored per user.

## 2. Lifecycle States

```
DISCOVER → INSPECT → PREPARE WINDOW → EXECUTE → COMPLETE → ARCHIVE
```

Each transition emits an event (see `docs/event-bus.md`). Failures revert to `DISCOVER` with diagnostic info.

## 3. Approval Modes

| Mode | Description | Source Inspiration |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `auto` | Executes allowed operations silently once configured. | Codex `--full-auto` |
| `ask` | Prompts user for confirmation on each potentially destructive action. | VS Code Workspace Trust |
| `deny` | Blocks the action until operator toggles mode. | Claude Code sandbox defaults |
| `plan-review` | Produces a plan, awaits approval per stage, then executes. | Gemini CLI Agent Mode |

Approval state is stored in SQLite (`context_store.approvals`). CLI commands:

```
bookkeeper set approval ask
bookkeeper show approval
```

Bookkeeper also surfaces the current mode in its status bar.

## 4. Guidance Protocol

1. Subagents emit `guidance.request` when they need feedback.
2. Bookkeeper prompts the user, logs the response to `logs/guidance/<session>.json`, and emits `guidance.append`.
3. If the user references historical guidance, Bookkeeper reads the JSON file and summarizes entries without converting formats.

## 5. Error Remediation Protocol

1. Detect error keywords -> emit `agent.error` event.
2. Append remediation sentence to `/agents/<id>/commands/DATE.jsonl`.
3. Notify Bookkeeper so it can display the remediation summary immediately.

## 6. Conversational File Management

- Listing and deletion requests occur via natural language (see `docs/bookkeeper.md`).
- Bookkeeper never deletes files; it only confirms and shows the manual POSIX command.
- Events `guidance.list` and `guidance.delete.requested` capture audit context.

## 7. Retention Policy

- Guidance JSON files persist until the user removes them.
- `/agents/<id>/commands` persist for the project lifecycle.
- Event logs rotate by day but should be archived before deletion to maintain traceability.

## 8. Compliance Checklist

- [ ] Commands only run in `liku` tmux sessions.
- [ ] Approval mode stored before executing agent tasks.
- [ ] `/agents/<id>/commands` updated for every remediation.
- [ ] Guidance logs listed/deleted via conversational prompts.
- [ ] HTTP endpoints disabled until approvals + guidance defaults configured.

## 9. tmux Safe-Execution Protocol

Option A from `Ideas/extension-brainstorming-PIDs` is now implemented via the `liku exec` and `liku panes` commands:

1. **Dedicated session.** `liku exec` ensures the AI-controlled session `<session-key>-agent` exists, bootstraps the `general`, `background`, `logging`, and `sandbox` windows, and never reuses the operator's active TTY.
2. **Window hygiene.** Before launching a command, LIKU inspects every pane in the target window via `tmux list-panes`. If all panes are busy, it automatically splits a fresh pane so running jobs remain untouched.
3. **Structured launch.** Commands are issued with `tmux send-keys` and recorded to `~/.liku/state/panes/pane-*.json` together with the TerminalID (`session:window.pane`), PID, cwd, and timestamp.
4. **Telemetry.** Each invocation emits a `command.exec` event so Bookkeeper and downstream tooling can narrate the activity stream.
5. **Inspection.** `liku panes` renders the recorded metadata (TerminalID, status, last command, updated timestamp) so operators or higher-level agents can decide where to resume work.

These guarantees satisfy Option A’s promises: AI never hijacks the human terminal, always inspects pane state, tracks every job, and maintains complete tmux awareness for later guidance or remediation.

This protocol ensures LIKU remains safe, auditable, and aligned with industry standards as the extension matures.
