docs/testing.md, before:

# LIKU Testing Guide

This guide describes how to verify the LIKU runtime across the environments most contributors use today: VS Code Insiders, GitHub Copilot CLI, Gemini CLI, and ChatGPT Codex CLI. Each workflow assumes you already have the repository cloned and the baseline prerequisites installed (POSIX shell, `tmux`, `sqlite3`, `inotifywait`, Node.js 20+, Python 3.11+, Git).

## 0. Global Preparation

Before running any scenario:

1. Ensure executable bits are set:
   ```bash
   chmod +x install.sh uninstall.sh bin/* core/*.sh bookkeeper/*.sh agents/*/*.sh
   ```
2. Install LIKU into your home directory:
   ```bash
   ./install.sh
   ```
3. Validate that your shell sees the prerequisite tooling **before** you continue:
   - **Windows PowerShell (VS Code Insiders default)**
     ```powershell
     node --version
     jq --version
     Get-Command node
     Get-Command jq
     ```
   - **Linux / macOS shells**
     ```bash
     which node jq
     node --version
     jq --version
     ```
   These checks document whether the host (PowerShell) already has Node 20+ and `jq` even if the WSL guest still needs its own packages.
4. Open a **new** terminal and run the doctor to catch dependency issues:
   ```bash
   likuctl doctor
   ```
5. Verify PATH updates by running:
   ```bash
   liku status
   ```
6. Confirm `tmux` works (`tmux -V`).
7. On Windows, decide how you want to drive the Linux runtime:
   - **Pure WSL shell**: open the Ubuntu/WSL terminal (or VS Code “WSL: Ubuntu” window) and run the rest of this guide verbatim.
   - **PowerShell controlling WSL**: stay in the default PowerShell terminal and prefix commands with `wsl -e bash -lc "<your command>"` to keep transcripts inside PS while the bash logic still runs in Ubuntu. This is the safest way to issue package installs such as:
     ```powershell
     wsl -e bash -lc "sudo apt update"
     wsl -e bash -lc "sudo apt install -y inotify-tools sqlite3"
     ```
     VS Code Insiders captures the PowerShell history automatically, so these lines become part of your audit trail while still executing inside Ubuntu.

With the basics complete, follow one (or all) of the environment-specific flows below.

---

## 1. VS Code Insiders Workflow

1. **Launch VS Code Insiders** and open the `Liku-extensions` folder (`File → Open Folder…`).
2. **Select the WSL/Remote environment** (if on Windows) using the Remote Explorer so all shells run inside Ubuntu.
3. **Install recommended extensions** (ShellCheck, Bash IDE) when prompted.
4. **Open a new integrated terminal** (`Terminal → New Terminal`). Confirm it uses bash/zsh and WSL (if applicable).
5. **Restore dependencies**:
   ```bash
   sudo apt update
   sudo apt install -y tmux inotify-tools sqlite3
   npm install --global @githubnext/cli # optional helper
   ```
6. **Run the installer again from the integrated terminal** (ensures VS Code shell picks up the latest build):
   ```bash
   ./install.sh
   ```
7. **Spawn sample agents** to verify tmux + Bookkeeper wiring:
   ```bash
   liku spawn build-agent
   liku spawn test-agent
   ```
   - Observe new tmux panes appear (if you started from an existing tmux session) or check `tmux ls` to see the `liku-<tty>` session created for you.
8. **Start Bookkeeper** in another terminal tab:
   ```bash
   liku bookkeeper
   ```
   - Confirm the banner shows `TERM`, `TTY`, and `Session` values that match your VS Code terminal pane.
9. **Tail events** to ensure audit logs are created:
   ```bash
   liku event stream --since 1m | jq '.'
   ```
10. **Review artifacts** inside the Explorer:
    - `~/.liku/state/agents/*.json` should list each agent with the detected terminal metadata.
    - `state/events/*.event` files should reflect every spawn/bookkeeper action.

This completes the Insiders-centric test run.

---

## 2. GitHub Copilot CLI Workflow

> Requires the `github-copilot-cli` preview (`npm install -g @githubnext/github-copilot-cli`) and a GitHub account with Copilot access.

1. **Authenticate** Copilot CLI:
   ```bash
   github-copilot-cli auth login
   ```
2. **Ask Copilot CLI to draft a test plan** inside the repo root:
   ```bash
   github-copilot-cli task "verify liku install"
   ```
   - Accept the generated plan or tweak it interactively.
3. **Execute Copilot CLI suggestions** (typically it proposes commands similar to):
   ```bash
   ./install.sh
   liku status
   liku spawn lint-agent
   ```
4. **Validate tmux panes** with Copilot’s recommended follow-up command:
   ```bash
   tmux list-panes -a -F '#S #T #{pane_pid} #{pane_title}'
   ```
5. **Confirm Bookkeeper rendering** by letting Copilot CLI launch it:
   ```bash
   github-copilot-cli shell "liku bookkeeper"
   ```
   - Copilot CLI keeps the context so you can narrate what you see and ask for troubleshooting steps if the TUI fails.
6. **Inspect logs** the CLI references:
   ```bash
   cat ~/.liku/state/session/env.json
   cat ~/.liku/state/agents/build-agent.json
   ```
7. **Close Copilot CLI session** once all checks pass: `exit`.

This demonstrates that LIKU behaves consistently when command sequences come from Copilot CLI prompts.

---

## 3. Gemini CLI Workflow

> Assumes you installed the Gemini Agent Mode CLI (`pip install google-genai-cli`, placeholder name `gemini`).

1. **Authenticate** with your Google API key:
   ```bash
   export GEMINI_API_KEY=... # or use the CLI's login command
   gemini auth login
   ```
2. **Start a Gemini Agent session** in the repo root:
   ```bash
   gemini agent start --name liku-audit
   ```
3. **Request a setup script** from Gemini:
   ```bash
   gemini> Run the LIKU installer and confirm Bookkeeper works
   ```
   - Gemini will suggest commands you can approve/deny (mirroring LIKU’s own approval philosophy).
4. **Approve the proposed shell steps** (expect variants of):
   ```bash
   ./install.sh
   liku spawn build-agent
   liku event stream --since 2m
   ```
5. **Inspect the generated transcript** (Gemini saves it under `~/.config/gemini/sessions/`). Keep it for auditing beside LIKU’s JSONL logs.
6. **Exit agent mode** when done:
   ```bash
   gemini agent stop liku-audit
   ```
7. **Cross-check LIKU logs** to ensure the Gemini-driven session is recorded:
   ```bash
   jq '.' ~/.liku/state/agents/build-agent.json
   tail ~/.liku/state/events/*.event
   ```

> **Gemini CLI extension crash**: If you see an error similar to `Error loading commands from ... .gemini\extensions\nanobanana\commands: DOMException [AbortError]`, delete the offending extension directory and reinstall the CLI:
> ```powershell
> Remove-Item -Recurse -Force "$env:USERPROFILE\.gemini\extensions\nanobanana"
> npm install -g @google/gemini-cli@latest
> ```
> Then rerun `gemini agent start --name liku-audit`. The CLI falls back to its core commands once third-party extensions are removed.

This validates LIKU from inside the Gemini CLI’s agent workflow and mirrors the plan/approval UX highlighted in the protocol document.

---

## 4. ChatGPT Codex CLI Workflow

> For OpenAI Codex CLI users (`pip install openai-codex-cli` or `npm install -g @openai/codex-cli`). Adjust commands to the specific distribution you use.

1. **Log in** with your OpenAI API key:
   ```bash
   export OPENAI_API_KEY=...
   codex login
   ```
2. **Initialize a Codex session** in "plan-first" mode to mirror LIKU’s approvals:
   ```bash
   codex plan "Test LIKU runtime"
   ```
3. **Let Codex suggest a command batch** (should include `./install.sh`, `liku status`, `liku spawn ...`). Review and approve step-by-step.
4. **Execute the Codex-generated script** automatically:
   ```bash
   codex run plan
   ```
5. **Have Codex inspect outputs** by running follow-up queries like:
   ```bash
   codex ask "What is inside ~/.liku/state/session/env.json?"
   ```
   - Provide the file contents when prompted; Codex will reason about correctness.
6. **Request Bookkeeper validation**:
   ```bash
   codex run "liku bookkeeper"
   ```
   - Confirm the CLI echoes the TUI banner to prove Codex is sharing your terminal context.
7. **Save the Codex transcript** (`codex history export`) alongside the LIKU event logs for audit parity.

This path ensures LIKU behaves when driven by Codex’s approval-centric CLI, reinforcing the same safety posture described in `docs/protocol.md`.

---

## 5. What to Look For

Across all environments, testing is successful when:

- `liku status` lists the scaffold agents without errors.
- Spawning an agent creates a tmux pane/session named after your detected TTY (see `~/.liku/state/session/env.json`).
- Bookkeeper refuses to run in unsupported terminals and otherwise displays the environment banner.
- `state/events/*.event` files include `term`, `tty`, and `session` metadata for each action.
- `/agents/<name>/commands/DATE.jsonl` gains entries whenever you force an `ERROR`/`FAIL` condition in an agent window.

If any environment behaves differently, capture the CLI transcript, the relevant JSON state files, and file an issue referencing this guide.

Commit message:

feat: Add 'liku exec' and 'liku panes' commands for enhanced tmux session management and update documentation extension is able to install and render static info of dynamic data.

docs/testing.md, after:

# LIKU Testing Guide

This guide describes how to verify the LIKU runtime across the environments most contributors use today: VS Code Insiders, GitHub Copilot CLI, Gemini CLI, and ChatGPT Codex CLI. Each workflow assumes you already have the repository cloned and the baseline prerequisites installed (POSIX shell, `tmux`, `sqlite3`, `inotifywait`, Node.js 20+, Python 3.11+, Git).

## 0. Global Preparation

Before running any scenario:

1. Ensure executable bits are set:
   ```bash
   chmod +x install.sh uninstall.sh bin/* core/*.sh bookkeeper/*.sh agents/*/*.sh
   ```
2. Install LIKU into your home directory:
   ```bash
   ./install.sh
   ```
3. Validate that your shell sees the prerequisite tooling **before** you continue:
   - **Windows PowerShell (VS Code Insiders default)**
     ```powershell
     node --version
     jq --version
     Get-Command node
     Get-Command jq
     ```
   - **Linux / macOS shells**
     ```bash
     which node jq
     node --version
     jq --version
     ```
   These checks document whether the host (PowerShell) already has Node 20+ and `jq` even if the WSL guest still needs its own packages.
4. Open a **new** terminal and run the doctor to catch dependency issues:
   ```bash
   likuctl doctor
   ```
5. Verify PATH updates by running:
   ```bash
   liku status
   ```
6. Confirm `tmux` works (`tmux -V`).
7. On Windows, decide how you want to drive the Linux runtime:
   - **Pure WSL shell**: open the Ubuntu/WSL terminal (or VS Code “WSL: Ubuntu” window) and run the rest of this guide verbatim.
   - **PowerShell controlling WSL**: stay in the default PowerShell terminal and prefix commands with `wsl -e bash -lc "<your command>"` to keep transcripts inside PS while the bash logic still runs in Ubuntu. This is the safest way to issue package installs such as:
     ```powershell
     wsl -e bash -lc "sudo apt update"
     wsl -e bash -lc "sudo apt install -y inotify-tools sqlite3"
     ```
     VS Code Insiders captures the PowerShell history automatically, so these lines become part of your audit trail while still executing inside Ubuntu.

With the basics complete, follow one (or all) of the environment-specific flows below.

---

## 1. VS Code Insiders Workflow

1. **Launch VS Code Insiders** and open the `Liku-extensions` folder (`File → Open Folder…`).
2. **Select the WSL/Remote environment** (if on Windows) using the Remote Explorer so all shells run inside Ubuntu.
3. **Install recommended extensions** (ShellCheck, Bash IDE) when prompted.
4. **Open a new integrated terminal** (`Terminal → New Terminal`). Confirm it uses bash/zsh and WSL (if applicable).
5. **Restore dependencies**:
   ```bash
   sudo apt update
   sudo apt install -y tmux inotify-tools sqlite3
   npm install --global @githubnext/cli # optional helper
   ```
6. **Run the installer again from the integrated terminal** (ensures VS Code shell picks up the latest build):
   ```bash
   ./install.sh
   ```
7. **Spawn sample agents** to verify tmux + Bookkeeper wiring:
   ```bash
   liku spawn build-agent
   liku spawn test-agent
   ```
   - Observe new tmux panes appear (if you started from an existing tmux session) or check `tmux ls` to see the `liku-<tty>` session created for you.
8. **Start Bookkeeper** in another terminal tab:
   ```bash
   liku bookkeeper
   ```
   - Confirm the banner shows `TERM`, `TTY`, and `Session` values that match your VS Code terminal pane.
9. **Tail events** to ensure audit logs are created:
   ```bash
   liku event stream --since 1m | jq '.'
   ```
10. **Exercise the tmux exec wrapper** to prove Option A is live:
   ```bash
   liku exec --window general -- echo "tmux-safe"
   liku panes
   ```
   - The `exec` command should print the tmux pane identifier and `liku panes` should list the recorded TerminalID, status, and last command.
11. **Review artifacts** inside the Explorer:
    - `~/.liku/state/agents/*.json` should list each agent with the detected terminal metadata.
    - `state/events/*.event` files should reflect every spawn/bookkeeper action.

This completes the Insiders-centric test run.

---

## 2. GitHub Copilot CLI Workflow

> Requires the `github-copilot-cli` preview (`npm install -g @githubnext/github-copilot-cli`) and a GitHub account with Copilot access.

1. **Authenticate** Copilot CLI:
   ```bash
   github-copilot-cli auth login
   ```
2. **Ask Copilot CLI to draft a test plan** inside the repo root:
   ```bash
   github-copilot-cli task "verify liku install"
   ```
   - Accept the generated plan or tweak it interactively.
3. **Execute Copilot CLI suggestions** (typically it proposes commands similar to):
   ```bash
   ./install.sh
   liku status
   liku spawn lint-agent
   ```
4. **Validate tmux panes** with Copilot’s recommended follow-up command:
   ```bash
   tmux list-panes -a -F '#S #T #{pane_pid} #{pane_title}'
   ```
5. **Confirm Bookkeeper rendering** by letting Copilot CLI launch it:
   ```bash
   github-copilot-cli shell "liku bookkeeper"
   ```
   - Copilot CLI keeps the context so you can narrate what you see and ask for troubleshooting steps if the TUI fails.
6. **Inspect logs** the CLI references:
   ```bash
   cat ~/.liku/state/session/env.json
   cat ~/.liku/state/agents/build-agent.json
   ```
7. **Close Copilot CLI session** once all checks pass: `exit`.

This demonstrates that LIKU behaves consistently when command sequences come from Copilot CLI prompts.

---

## 3. Gemini CLI Workflow

> Assumes you installed the Gemini Agent Mode CLI (`pip install google-genai-cli`, placeholder name `gemini`).

1. **Authenticate** with your Google API key:
   ```bash
   export GEMINI_API_KEY=... # or use the CLI's login command
   gemini auth login
   ```
2. **Start a Gemini Agent session** in the repo root:
   ```bash
   gemini agent start --name liku-audit
   ```
3. **Request a setup script** from Gemini:
   ```bash
   gemini> Run the LIKU installer and confirm Bookkeeper works
   ```
   - Gemini will suggest commands you can approve/deny (mirroring LIKU’s own approval philosophy).
4. **Approve the proposed shell steps** (expect variants of):
   ```bash
   ./install.sh
   liku spawn build-agent
   liku event stream --since 2m
   ```
5. **Inspect the generated transcript** (Gemini saves it under `~/.config/gemini/sessions/`). Keep it for auditing beside LIKU’s JSONL logs.
6. **Exit agent mode** when done:
   ```bash
   gemini agent stop liku-audit
   ```
7. **Cross-check LIKU logs** to ensure the Gemini-driven session is recorded:
   ```bash
   jq '.' ~/.liku/state/agents/build-agent.json
   tail ~/.liku/state/events/*.event
   ```

> **Gemini CLI extension crash**: If you see an error similar to `Error loading commands from ... .gemini\extensions\nanobanana\commands: DOMException [AbortError]`, delete the offending extension directory and reinstall the CLI:
> ```powershell
> Remove-Item -Recurse -Force "$env:USERPROFILE\.gemini\extensions\nanobanana"
> npm install -g @google/gemini-cli@latest
> ```
> Then rerun `gemini agent start --name liku-audit`. The CLI falls back to its core commands once third-party extensions are removed.

This validates LIKU from inside the Gemini CLI’s agent workflow and mirrors the plan/approval UX highlighted in the protocol document.

---

## 4. ChatGPT Codex CLI Workflow

> For OpenAI Codex CLI users (`pip install openai-codex-cli` or `npm install -g @openai/codex-cli`). Adjust commands to the specific distribution you use.

1. **Log in** with your OpenAI API key:
   ```bash
   export OPENAI_API_KEY=...
   codex login
   ```
2. **Initialize a Codex session** in "plan-first" mode to mirror LIKU’s approvals:
   ```bash
   codex plan "Test LIKU runtime"
   ```
3. **Let Codex suggest a command batch** (should include `./install.sh`, `liku status`, `liku spawn ...`). Review and approve step-by-step.
4. **Execute the Codex-generated script** automatically:
   ```bash
   codex run plan
   ```
5. **Have Codex inspect outputs** by running follow-up queries like:
   ```bash
   codex ask "What is inside ~/.liku/state/session/env.json?"
   ```
   - Provide the file contents when prompted; Codex will reason about correctness.
6. **Request Bookkeeper validation**:
   ```bash
   codex run "liku bookkeeper"
   ```
   - Confirm the CLI echoes the TUI banner to prove Codex is sharing your terminal context.
7. **Save the Codex transcript** (`codex history export`) alongside the LIKU event logs for audit parity.

This path ensures LIKU behaves when driven by Codex’s approval-centric CLI, reinforcing the same safety posture described in `docs/protocol.md`.

---

## 5. What to Look For

Across all environments, testing is successful when:

- `liku status` lists the scaffold agents without errors.
- Spawning an agent creates a tmux pane/session named after your detected TTY (see `~/.liku/state/session/env.json`).
- Bookkeeper refuses to run in unsupported terminals and otherwise displays the environment banner.
- `state/events/*.event` files include `term`, `tty`, and `session` metadata for each action.
- `/agents/<name>/commands/DATE.jsonl` gains entries whenever you force an `ERROR`/`FAIL` condition in an agent window.

If any environment behaves differently, capture the CLI transcript, the relevant JSON state files, and file an issue referencing this guide.
